---
layout: post
title:  "Halo Beriti"
location: "Ethiopia"
region: "Gedeb"
altitude: "2100–2300m"
varietals: "Heirloom"
process: "Washed process"
date: 2021-09-26
permalink: /ethiopia/halo-beriti/
file: "f001.backblazeb2.com/file/light-roast/0002-halo-beriti.m4a"
duration: "00:05:07"
length: "5145666"
description: We are in Gedeb, Ethiopia tasting coffee from Halo Beriti, a special preparation from the washing station established in 2014.
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

<section class="my-4 space-y-4 font-body text-gray-400">
<p>This episode we are in Gedeb, Ethiopia tasting coffee from <a class="text-white border-b border-gray-300 hover:border-b border-gray-400 hover:border-gray-100" href="https://samplecoffee.com.au/coffee/halo-beriti">Halo Beriti</a>, a special preparation from the washing station established in 2014.</p>
<p>Halo or Halu Beriti washing station serves 750 smallholder producers, who deliver their coffee in cherry form. All coffee from this lot has been hand sorted so that only the best cherries made it into the bags.</p>
</section>

<!--more-->

<audio class="my-8 w-full h-8" src="https://{{ page.file }}" controls="" preload="none"></audio>

<h3 class="mb-4 font-display text-xl text-white">Links</h3>
<ul class="ml-4 font-body list-disc text-white">
	<li><a class="text-white border-b border-gray-300 hover:border-b border-gray-400 hover:border-gray-100" href="https://samplecoffee.com.au/coffee/halo-beriti">Halo Beriti (Gedeb)</a></li>
	<li><a class="text-white border-b border-gray-300 hover:border-b border-gray-400 hover:border-gray-100" href="https://allyopen.com/blogs/get-inspired/ethiopias-coffee-growing-regions-a-brief-explainer">Ethiopia's Coffee Growing Regions</a></li>
	<li><a class="text-white border-b border-gray-300 hover:border-b border-gray-400 hover:border-gray-100" href="https://www.trabocca.com/our-coffees/ethiopia/yirgacheffe/halo-beriti-washing-station/">Trabocca: Halo Beriti washing station</a></li>
</ul>
<h3 class="my-4 font-display text-xl text-white">Transcript</h3>
<section class="font-body text-sm space-y-2 text-gray-400">
<p>Today we're going to be talking about a relatively new washing station in Ethiopia, known as Halo or Halu Beriti. Halo Beriti is located in Yirgacheffe. Yirgacheffe includes the woredas of Dila Zuria, Wenago, Bule, Kochere, Gedeb and Yirgacheffe, all within the Gedeo zone of the Southern Nations, Nationalities, and People's Region. Yirgacheffe woreda gives the Yirgacheffe coffee regions its name. Most washing stations are named for the kebele or town where they are located, or for a special location, or the name of the individual owner.</p>
<p>The thing to remember is that the districts all have their own characteristics, and those characteristics make up the overall cup profile. This particular lot is part of a special preparation in which hand sorting was repeatedly done throughout the receiving of the cherries and the drying process itself, which is great, because then obviously you get the finest coffee cherries from this particular area.</p>
<p>Coffees in Ethiopia are only really traceable to a washing station, because so many of the farmers own very small... small farms, right, and so everything gets mixed in together. When that happens, no information is essentially retained as to whose harvest is in what bag and in what lot, which essentially with Ethiopian coffee means that if you're looking to buy Ethiopian coffee and you see that the coffee itself is labeled as being of an heirloom varietal or varietals, then that's essentially what they're talking about. There's no actual traceability beyond the washing station level.</p>
<p>This particular coffee comes from a region called Gedeb in Yirgacheffe. It's very high. It's between 2,100 and 2,300 meters above sea level, that range there indicative of how many small farms are actually contributing to the washing station.</p>
<p>I've talked a little bit about washing stations, and somebody who is not overly familiar with specialty coffee may be saying, "Well, what is a washing station? I don't know what you're talking about." So what I'll do is I'll just touch on what that means in terms of what you get in your cup.</p>
<p>Each coffee fruit essentially is made up of several layers. Coffee processing is the removal of these layers. Washed coffees are the flavor of the beans itself, as everything else has since been removed. That means that it's really on that bean to be excellent, because everything else has been stripped away. So that means variables such as varietal, soil, weather, ripeness, fermentation, the washing itself and the drawing are key to delivering excellent coffee using this process.</p>
<p>When tasting this coffee from Halo Beriti, I found that it's a lighter bodied coffee, and depending on my mood and depending on the day, I do really like lighter body coffees, because sometimes you just want a nice, easy and very tasty coffee, right?</p>
<p>With this coffee I adjusted my grind a little bit. I ground this coffee a little bit finer than the coffee that I ground from Guatemala from Finca El Regalo in the last episode. Having said that, I only ground it finer by one click on my hand grinder, so there wasn't a huge difference, but when adhering to the Specialty Coffee Association standards for water to coffee ratio, I found it a little thin, and so I fined it up just a touch, and that really made it shine.</p>
<p>Sample have said that they have a number of Ethiopians ready to go and I couldn't be more excited about that. I cannot wait to try more Ethiopians from Sample. I find that those guys really know how to roast Ethiopian coffee. Forever indebted to Sample's roasting skills.</p>
</section>